# 1. Source Code & Machine Code

**Machines** understand only **binary**. When human write **source code**, a list of instructions for the computer that is _human-readable_, machines only understand what is called **machine code**.

**Source code** is converted to **machine code** using **compilers** and **interpreters**.

---

## 2. Compiled Languages

- Compiled languages are converted directly into machine code that the processor can execute.
- They tend to be faster and more efficient.
- They give the developer more control over hardware aspects like memory management and CPU usage.
- They need a _build_ step, meaning they need to be manually compiled first.
- You need to _rebuild_ the program every time there's a change.

### 2.1. Examples of Compiled Languages:

- C
- C++
- Erlang
- Haskell
- Rust
- Go

## 3. Interpreted Languages

- Are run through a program _line by line_ and execute each command.
- They were once significantly slower than compiled languages, but with development of **just-in-time compilation**, that gap is shrinking.

### 3.1. Examples of Interpreted Languages:

- Python
- PHP
- Ruby
- JavaScript

Most programming languages can have both **compiled** and **interpreted** implementations. The _language_ itself is not necessarily **compiled** or **interpreted**, but for simplicity, they are referred to as such.

---

## 4. Compiling

The `make` command used to compile **C** programs in the **CS50** version of **VSCode**, actually calls a program named `clang`, which is a _compiler_ named for the _C Language_.

**Compiling** _source code_ into _machine code_ is made up of four steps:

### 4.1. Preprocessing:

- involves replacing the lines that start with `#`, like `#include <stdio.h>`, which tells the _compiler_ to look for that header file since it prototypes of functions that we want to include in our program.

### 4.2. Compiling:

- takes the _source code_ in **C** and converts it into _assembly language_, which includes instructions for basic operations on memory and values, closer to the binary instructions that a **CPU** can directly understand.

### 4.3. Assembling:

- the step that takes the code in _assembly_ and translates it into _binary_.
- the instructions in binary are _machine code_, which a **CPU** can run directly.

### 4.4. Linking:

- takes previously compiled versions of **libraries** that we included earlier, and combines them with our program.
- in other words, **linking** is the process of combining all the _machine code_ for `hello.c`, `cs50.c`, etc. into our one binary file.

These steps are abstracted by the `make` command, so we can think of the entire process as **compiling**.
