# 1. Sorting

**Sorting** is used to rearrange a given array of list of elements according to a comparison operator on the elements. The comparison operator is used to decide the new order of elements in the structure.

---

## 1.1. Selection Sort

The **selection sort** algorithm sorts an array by repeatedly finding the mininum element (considering ascending order) from the unsorted part and putting it at the beginning.

The algorithm maintains two subarrays in a given array:

- the subarray which already sorted.
- the remaining unsorted array.

---

## 1.2. Bubble Sort

The **bubble sort** algorithm is the simplest sorting algorithm. It works by repeatedly swapping the adjacent elements if they are in the wrong order.

This algorithm is not suitable for large arrays because its average and worst-case time complexity are quite high.

---

## 1.3. Merge Sort

The **merge sort** algorithm is based on the _divide and conquer_ paradigm. The initial array is split into two equal halves and then combined in a sorted manner.

Think of it as a **recursive** algorithm that continuously splits the array in half until it cannot be further divided, meaning if the array becomes empty or has one element left in it, the dividing will stop and it is the base case to stop the **recursion**. If the array has multiple elements, split the array into halves and **recursively** invoke the merge to sort on each of the halves. Finally when both halves are sorted, the merge operation is applied. Merge operation is the process of taking two smaller sorted arrays and combining them to eventually make a larger one.

---

## [1.4. Comparison of Sorting Algorithms](https://www.cs.usfca.edu/~galles/visualization/ComparisonSort.html)
