# 1. Non-Relational Databases

A **non-relational database** is a **database** that does not use the tabular schema of rows and columns found in most traditional database systems. Instead, they use a storage model that is optimized for the specific requirements of the type of data being stored.

These type of **databases** don't use the _relational model_. Also, they tend to be more specific in the type of data they support and how data can be queried. 

The term **NoSQL** refers to data stores that do not use **SQL** for queries. Instead, the data stores use other programming languages and constructs to query the data. Although **NoSQL** stands for _non-relational database_, many of these **databases** support **SQL** compatible queries. However, the query execution is usually very different from how a traditional **RDBMS** would execute the same query.

---

## 1.1. Types of Non-Relational Databases

### **1. Document Data Stores**

A document data store manages a set of named string fields and object data values in an entity that's referred to as a _document_. They tend to store data in the form of JSON documents.

### **2. Columnar Data Stores**

A columnar or column-family data store organizes data into columns and rows. They can appear very similar to relational databases, conceptually. The real power of this type of databases lies in its denormalized approach to structuring sparse data, which stems from the column-oriented approach to storing data.

### **3. Key-Value Data Stores**

It's essentially a large hash table/dictionary. You associate each value with a unique key, and the key/value store uses this key to store the data by using an appropiate hashing function. The hashing function is selected to provide an even distribution of hashed keys across the data storage.

### **4. Graph Data Stores**

A graph data store manages two types of information, nodes and edges. Nodes represent entities, and edges specify the relationships between these entities. Both nodes and edges can have properties that provide information about that node or edge, similar to columns in a table. Edges can also have a direction indicating the nature of the relationship.

### **5. Time Series Data Stores**

Time series data is a set of values organized by time, and a time series data store is optimized for this type of data. Time series data stores must support a very high number of writes, as they typically collect large amounts of data in real time from a large number of sources. Time series data stores are optimized for storing telemetry data. Scenarios include IoT sensors or application/system counters.

### **6. Object Data Stores**

Object data stores are optimized for storing and retrieving large binary objects or blobs such as images, text files, video and audio streams, large application data objects and documents, and virtual machine disk images. An object consists of the stored data, some metadata, and a unique ID for accessing the object. Object stores are designed to support files that are individually very large, as well provide large amounts of total storage to manage all files.

### **7. External Index Data Stores**

External index data stores provide the ability to search for information held in other data stores and services. An external index acts as a secondary index for any data store, and can be used to index massive volumes of data and provide near real-time access to these indexes.
