# 1. Internet

The **internet** is a worldwide system of computer networks that uses the **protocol suite** (_TCP/IP_) to communicate between networks and devices.

To transfer **data** from one network to another, we need to make _routing decisions_. The **data** could take multiple paths, such that when a router is congested, **data** can flow through another path.

_TCP/IP_ are two protocols that allow computers to transfer **data** between them over the internet.

---

## 1.1. IP

**IP** or **Internet Protocol** is a way by which computers can identify one another across the internet. Every computer has a unique address in the world, by this form `#.#.#.#`. Instead of the hashes, there are numbers that range from 0 to 255. **IP** addresses are 32-bits, meaning that these addresses could accomodate over 4 billion addresses. Newer versions of **IP** addresses can accomodate even more computers.

---

## 1.2. TCP

**TCP** or **Transmission Control Protocol** is used to distinguish web services from one another. For example, `80` is used to denote _HTTP_ and `443` is used to denote _HTTPS_. These numbers are **port numbers**. When information is sent from one location to another, an **IP** address and **TCP** port number are sent.

These protocols are also used to fragment large files into multiple parts called _packets_. For example, a large photo can be sent in multiple packets. When a packet is lost, **TCP/IP** can request missing packets again from the origin server. **TCP** will acknowledge when all the **data** has been transmitted and received.

---

## 1.3. DNS

**DNS** or **Domain Name System** is a collection of servers on the internet that are used to route website addresses to a specific **IP** address, instead of needing the address for visiting the website.

**DNS** simply hold a table or database that links specific, fully qualified domain names to specific **IP** addresses.

---

## 1.4. HTTP

**HTTP** or **Hypertext Transfer Protocol** is an application-level protocol that developers use to build things. When you see an address such as `https://www.example.com` you are actually implicitly visiting that address with a `/` at the end of it.

The **path** is what exists after that `/`. For example, `https://www.example.com/folder/file.html` visits `example.com` and browses for the `folder` and then visits the file named `file.html`.

### 1.4.1. HTTP Methods

The **https** in the address is the protocol used to connect to that web address. **HTTP** utilizes _GET_ or _POST_ requests to ask for information from a server.

- _GET_ is used to request **data** from a specified source. _GET_ requests can be cached, remain in the browser history, can be bookmarked, should never be used when dealing with sensitive **data**, are only used to request **data**, not modify it.
- _POST_ is used to send **data** to a server to create/update a resource. _POST_ requests are never cached, do not remain in the browser history and cannot be bookmarked.

### 1.4.2. HTTP Messages

When requesting a service from a web server, an error might occur, and the server might return an error code like `404 Not Found`. The server always returns a message for every request. The most coomon message is `200 OK`, which means that the request was successful.

List of all the HTTP status messages can be found here: https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_httpmessages.asp.
